
Reveling in the Doom Together
Care and Feeding
My Mom Wants to Partake in a Classic Modern Grandparent Tradition. It’s Not Going to Happen.
She hate this.
Advice by Michelle Herman
Sept 28, 20258:00 AM
A social media post with an emoji over the child's face.
Photo illustration by Slate. Photos by Getty Images Plus.

Care and Feeding is Slate’s parenting advice column. Have a question for Care and Feeding? Submit it here.

Dear Care and Feeding,

I just had a baby, and my mom wants to post pictures of her on Facebook, where she is eager to share them with her hundreds of friends. My husband and I are both averse to social media, and she knows that (I don’t even let her post photos of me!). We’re concerned about privacy, identity theft, and future tech, plus I’m sure there’s a dash of superstition. We have no problem with her sending photos via email or text message to her friends, but Facebook gives us the ick.

So far, she is respecting our wishes, but she hates it and tells us regularly how unreasonable she thinks we are being. Can you recommend any resources to educate her (and ourselves) about the risks and nuances of this? Any ideas for a middle ground, or do we just hold this boundary and leave her to figure out how to accept it, because it’s our baby?

—Overwhelmed by the Grandmarazzi
The Gaza Flotilla That’s Under Attack
Read More
exp-customer-logo

Dear Overwhelmed,

The only middle ground—which wouldn’t satisfy the Grandmarazzi anyway, I’m sure—is the one some of my young friends have settled on: posting photos of their small children with a virtual sticker covering their faces (a smiley face, a heart, etc.). This is the way they satisfy their hunger to post on social media (some people really do feel it’s an essential part of life, and—as you know firsthand, thanks to your mom—it’s not always young people who can’t live without sharing their every experience in this fashion) while protecting their young children’s privacy.

I don’t recommend going this route, though (even if your mother would agree to it—or, for that matter, could figure out how to employ a virtual sticker and could be counted on to remember to do so with every post). You don’t want your child on social media! That is your decision to make. The only reason you’d opt for this middle ground would be to stop your mom from badgering you. This is not a good reason to go against your instincts or your wishes.
Advertisement

There’s plenty of information out there to support your point of view (and sure, share these resources with Mom—but be prepared for her to dismiss them all as overblown and “unreasonable”). There are also plenty of people sharing photos of their babies and children every day on Instagram and Facebook. (Your mother no doubt reminds you of this constantly.) It doesn’t matter that others do it (as your mom must have told you when you were a child—or in any case, what I was told all the time as a child: “If your friend jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge, that doesn’t mean you should do it too!”). Your child, your choice.

The next time Mom brings this up, tell her the matter has been decided and you don’t wish to discuss it any further. Yes, of course, I know this won’t be easy for you. If it were, you wouldn’t have written this letter. I’m here to tell you it’s time to stand up to her and stand up for yourself. This may be your first time doing so, but I guarantee it won’t be the last.
Get parenting and family advice—submit a question!

Please keep questions short (<150 words), and don‘t submit the same question to multiple columns. We are unable to edit or remove questions after publication. Use pseudonyms to maintain anonymity. Your submission may be used in other Slate advice columns and may be edited for publication.
Dear Care and Feeding,*
Your letter signoff
Your pronouns
Your email (optional and confidential—please include if you're open to Care and Feeding following up)

Dear Care and Feeding,

My kid just started 4K and will not tell us anything. We’ve tried moving beyond the standard, “What happened at school today?” to “What did you have for lunch?” (“I don’t know”), “Who did you play with?” (“[Best friend’s name]! Only [BF]!”), “Did anything funny happen today?” (“I don’t know”), “Did anyone cry today?” (“No”—OK, maybe that one is real). Some days, we get a couple of pictures, but when we ask about activities depicted, we mostly get, “I don’t know.”

I try not to ask immediately at pickup or while she is busy doing other things. I’m doing everything I can think of! Her teacher pulled my husband aside the other day at drop-off to tell him how wonderfully our kid is doing, how quickly she has adjusted to a new school, and how many new friends she is making, so we’re not worried—I am just genuinely interested in what she does all day! I feel like I need some new questions or a new approach.

—Desperate for Details

Dear Details,

There’s just one thing you haven’t thought of, and I’m going to tell you what it is, even though I know you’ll hate hearing it. So let me preface it by saying that I do feel your pain. I know very well how hard it is to go from knowing everything that your child has been up to all day—because you’ve seen it for yourself, she’s happily reported it to you, or the person whose care she’s been in has recounted it every day at pickup—to knowing virtually nothing about a big chunk of time she’s away from you. I get it. It feels weird and it’s a huge adjustment (for some of us, anyway).
Advertisement

But the thing to do is get off her back. If she wanted to tell you, she would.

You know she’s fine—her teacher has made that clear—and you yourself say you aren’t worried: You’re “just genuinely interested.” But your child is trying something out! She’s continuing the natural and healthy process of “individuating” from you—establishing that she is a whole separate person—and experimenting with the idea that she can have experiences and thoughts that you’re not a part of.

Margaret Mahler first described the earliest stages of this process; by the age of 3, the process has generally reached completion, and then it begins again dramatically in adolescence. (None of this—including the adolescent phase—happens consciously; that is, the child in question isn’t actively deciding to distance themselves. It’s just a developmental necessity.) I can’t tell you whether your daughter is experiencing a somewhat delayed early individuation—if, perhaps, you and she might have been at least a little bit enmeshed until now (you’d know far better than I!)—or if she’s so precocious the next phase is coming super-early, but I’m not sure it matters all that much (unless she begins to exhibit worrisome symptoms). The point is: I know you’re curious, but since your curiosity is matched by her determination to keep the details of her day(s) to herself, I think it would be wise to respect the boundary she’s setting. And if my guess is right—if this is her way of asserting her independence—your peppering her with questions, changing strategies, doing everything you can to get her to cough up information is likely to be having the opposite of their intended effect. The more you push, the less likely she’ll be to share.

So why not try not asking her anything about her day? Try just letting her be. And I don’t mean staying silent, being chilly—doing anything that suggests you’re punishing her for her refusal to answer your questions about her day. Be cheerful and matter-of-fact. Try saying, “Good day?” and then move on to other things: what’s going to happen next, what’s for dinner, something that’s coming up soon that she’s looking forward to—whatever. Let her tell you about what happens when she’s away from you in her own good time. She will, eventually. (Don’t put a timeline on it, either. That’s a losing proposition.)

Take it from one who knows: Her separation-individuation is a good development, even if it feels hard for you. As long as she seems happy and healthy, and her teachers continue to report that all is well, the best way forward is for you to gracefully allow her to just be. And if this is very hard for you, it may be time to take a look at your own separation process from her.
Send Your Questions to Good Job!

Laura Helmuth and Doree Shafrir want to help you navigate your social dynamics at work. Does your colleague constantly bug you after hours? Has an ill-advised work romance gone awry? Ask us your question here!
Advertisement

Dear Care and Feeding,

We are concerned that our 5-year-old daughter’s transition to brick-and-mortar school next year will be devastating. She attended/attends virtual school for pre-k and kindergarten; academically, she is performing several grades above her own (e.g., reading at a 2nd and 3rd-grade level). For social interaction, we take her to parks every day, and she plays group sports and interacts with other kids and coaches just fine.

But ever since she was 2, when we started parent-and-me sports classes, she has not been able to transition to being by herself on the field/court. She needs a parent to be nearby. I thought she would naturally transition into playing without us being right there with her by the time she was 4 or 5, but that hasn’t been the case. Looking ahead, where we only have a year left before she will attend in-person school and be away from us for many hours a day, we are concerned about her ability to transition without a lot of tears. We’ve tried talking/explaining as well as gently trying to move away and put a little distance between her and us when she is playing, but these efforts have been unsuccessful. Any suggestions?

—Hoping to Take a Few Steps Back

Dear Hoping,

My first suggestion is that you take it easy on her (and on yourselves!). Sure, lots of kids are ready—even eager—to separate from their parents once they’re past toddlerhood. But separation anxiety at age 5 is not unheard of. And starting kindergarten is a big adjustment for many children. Experts suggest that to help a child handle their anxiety about being away from their parents, it’s important that parents be very clear about what’s going to happen when they’re apart; likewise, when there’s going to be a change in routine, your child needs to know about it in advance. Don’t spring things on her. It’s also important to make transitions, such as school drop-off, swift, consistent, and positive. Find a balance between letting her express her feelings of distress and helping her focus on something to look forward to. Do not sneak away when she’s distracted—she needs to know she can trust you both to say goodbye and to come back later.
Related From Slate
Greg Lavallee
My Wife’s Halloween Candy Policy Makes Me See Red. But This Year, I Have a Plan.
Read More
Recommended for You
I’m Finally Recovering From a Serious Accident. Now I’ve Discovered What My Husband Was Doing During All That Time.
My Husband Has Always Assured Me My “Complication” in Bed Is No Big Deal. It’s Time to Put His Promise to the Test.
There’s Another Woman in My Boyfriend’s Life. But There Isn’t Enough Room for Both of Us.

Separation should get easier as the school year progresses, even if it’s very difficult at the beginning. Her kindergarten teacher can help, so don’t be shy about asking. Another tip from me: See if you can redirect your own framing of what’s ahead from “devastating” to “challenging.” (My guess is that this shift in perspective will help your child as well as you.) Meanwhile, in this yearlong run-up to her starting school, you can employ some of the suggestions above at playdates and so on. Start small: a playdate with one child she likes a lot and feels comfortable with—and whose parents understand the particular difficulties your child is having. (When my daughter went through a rough patch, and being away from me was hard for her, finding another family who’d had experience with this sort of thing was a godsend: That household was, for a while, the one place she felt safe being left. But eventually that feeling of ease grew more broadly.)
Advertisement

Unless your daughter’s distress rises to the level of separation anxiety disorder—in which case it will be essential to enlist professional help—this phase will pass. Be patient with her. Be patient with yourselves.

—Michelle
More Advice From Slate

A family recently moved into a house nearby, and their kids are exactly the same age as my older kids and are in their classes at school. My oldest kid, Oliver (9) has become best friends with their oldest kid, Sam. Sam’s mom is eccentric. She has a weird sort of snobbishness about her house, which she regularly tries to instill in her kids. On Sam’s first visit here, he was surprised that the things his mother said about us weren’t true…
Never miss new Advice columns
The latest sex, parenting, and money advice from our columnists delivered to your inbox three times a week.
Email address:
Send me updates about Slate special offers.
By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms.
Copy Link
Share
Comment

    Advice
    Family
    Parenting

Neuropathy is not from Low Vitamin B. Meet the Real Enemy of Neuropathy (Stop Doing This)FootRenew |
Sponsored
Cardiologist: Pink Salt Is The Enemy of Body Fat (See How To Use)nutrapeaklife.com |
Sponsored
Dementia Has Been Linked To a Common Habit. Do You Do It?Brain & Mind | USA |
Sponsored
Costco Shoppers Say This Fat-Burning Patch Triggers Weight Loss "Unlike Any Other"consumersfind |
Sponsored
This Witch Doorplate Is Being Snapped up in Iowa Cityiiipu |
Sponsored
Iowa City: New 2-Bed Senior Houses Are Stunning - Take A Peek Inside!Senior Houses | Search Ads |
Sponsored
Iowa City: Here’s The Average Price of a 6-Hour Gutter UpgradeHomebuddy.com |
Sponsored
This 250th Anniversary Hat Is Being Snapped up in Iowa CityFANYIL |
Sponsored
Why Thousands Of Senior Drivers Could Lose Their Licenses This WeekComparisons.org |
Sponsored
French Scientists Discover New Method To Alleviate Senior FatigueOxyNaturals |
Sponsored
Just Add 1 Drop Of This Household Item To Any Dark Spot and Wait 3 MinutesSoak Your Dark Spots With This One Thing (Trending Morning Routine)WellnessGuide |
Sponsored
You Can See People Wearing This 250th Anniversary Hat EverywhereGlosrity |
Sponsored
Scientists "Space Molecule" Discovery Makes 70s Feel Like Your 30sAdvanced Bionutritionals |
Sponsored
Stunning 2-Bed Senior Houses: Take A Peek Inside!Senior Houses | Search Ads |
Sponsored
Donald Trump’s 18-Year-Old Granddaughter Just Showed How She Intends to Use the Family Name. It’s a Doozy.Slate Magazine
Help! My Fiancé Wants Me to Cut Back on Working Out. His Reason Might Make Me Call Off the Whole Wedding.Slate Magazine
If You Eat Butter Daily, This Is What HappensGundry MD |
Sponsored
Costco Shoppers Say This Knee Pain Relief Device Is "Actually Worth It"healthadvicetoday |
Sponsored
Nobel Scientists Discover Method To Alleviate Senior FatigueOxyNaturals |
Sponsored
Iowa New Policy for Senior DriversThe Quote General |
Sponsored
Lara Is Retiring - Her Final Jewelry Pieces Are 80% OffArtisan Weekly |
Sponsored
MOST POPULAR
Help! My Wife Has Been Keeping a Humiliating Secret From Me. I Finally Caught Her Red-Handed.Slate Magazine
MOST POPULAR
The Supreme Court Just Knocked Down One of the Final Guardrails Against DictatorshipSlate Magazine
Three Iowa City Banks Are Paying Record High Interest Rates - See the ListSavingsPro |
Sponsored
MD: Lotions Won't Tighten Wrinkles! You Only Need This 1 Drugstore ItemThe Skincare Magazine |
Sponsored
Over 55? This Belt Could Change Your LifeWelnax™ LumbarRelief Pro |
Sponsored
Recommended For You
Moms Are Obsessed With a Macabre and Disturbing Pastime That Leaves Everyone Sad and Horrified. That’s What They Want.
My Wife Does a Rare Move in Bed Many Men Dream Of. I’m So Over It.
My Husband Thinks His Mother’s Conspiracy Theories are Harmless. I Think They’re Really Bad For Our Daughter.
Beer Is Officially on the Decline in America. No One Saw the Real Culprit Coming.
We’re About to Adopt a Little Boy. People’s Responses to That Are Honestly Flooring Me.
My Daughter’s Teacher Called With an Absurd Request. It Has to Do With Our Nighttime Reading Routine.
My Parents Are Forcing Us to Keep a Heartbreaking Secret. It’s Tearing the Family Apart.
The Neighbor Kids Keep Trespassing on Our Property. Their Parents’ Response Is Unhinged.
I’m Planning a Wedding With My Mom. I’m Worried We’ll Reenact a Terrible Part of My Teenage Years.
How Serious Is This Epstein Stuff for Teflon Trump? Here’s One Indicator.
My Mom Wants Me to Forget My Stepfather’s Racist “Joke” About a Children’s Character. No Way.
Help! My Son Shared a “Funny” Sleepover Story. Then I Heard What They Did to the Dog.
It’s So Obvious What My Wife Needs to Do to Help Me Climax. She Still Wont’ Do It.
My Mom Shared a Stunning Secret. It Changes How I Feel About Our Family.
My Husband Claims This Big Part of Parenting Is Entirely My Job. No Thanks!
About

